**Figures 2 and 3 are generated by running**: reproduce_results.ipynb

# Risk of developing Insulin Resistance in adults’ subjects with Phenylketonuria: Machine Learning model reveals association with phenylalanine concentration



This repository contains the scripts that were used in the publication 
https://www.mdpi.com/{REPLACE_THIS}

**Abstract**: 
Phenylketonuria is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism where high phenylalanine (Phe) concentration causes irreversible intellectual disability that can be prevented by newborn screening and early treatment. Recent research showed that subjects with PKU who are not adherent to the treatment could be at higher risk of developing insulin resistance (IR). This study aimed to associate high Phe concentration with the risk of developing IR using Machine Learning (ML) and to derive potential biomarkers. Three groups of patients were considered, G1: 10 subjects with a neonatal diagnosis of PKU which accomplished the treatment; G2: 14 subjects with a neonatal diagnosis of PKU which suspended the treatment; and G3: 24 control subjects. We observed higher Phe concentration and plasmatic insulin in G2 than in the others. We observed a positive correlation between Phe concentration and HOMA-IR and a negative with HOMA-S% and QUICKI. Then, a ML model was trained to predict abnormal HOMA-IR employing a panel of metabolites measured in blood. Notably, ranking the features' importance leaves Phe concentration as the second most important feature after BMI for predicting abnormal HOMA-IR. Our results indicate that low adherence to the PKU treatment, could affect insulin signaling, decrease glucose utilization and lead to IR.


-----

